Humans are the only species capable of communicating with an articulated
oral language and creating symbolic ideational cultures. Several
contradictory theories of human cognitive evolution have been developed in
attempts to model how, when, and amongst which hominid groups these abilities
emerged. Key issues concern what environmental, social, and adaptive
factors may have stimulated their adoption and facilitated their spread (e.g.
Changeux, 1983; Davidson and Noble, 1989; Deacon, 1997; Donald, 1991;
Eccles, 1989; Goonatilake, 1991; Knight et al., 1995; Mithen, 1994, 1996a,b;
Wynn, 1991, 1993). Since language and cognition do not fossilize, theorists
are forced to rely on evidence from archaeology and paleoanthropology to
corroborate their models. This approach becomes flawed because, unable to
test their evolutionary models adequately through a direct analysis of the
archaeological evidence, many of these theorists accept dominant archaeological
paradigms as established facts, without first sufficiently researching
the pertinent debates surrounding the interpretation of primary archaeological
and anthropological data. Worse still, they may adopt archaeological
scenarios that best fit their view, disregarding others.
An example of this is the chronology proposed by Ruhlen (1994, 1996)
and others for the origin of modern languages. He controversially uses the
methods of historical linguistics to reconstruct archetypal languages, and proposes
an evolutionary model based on the assumption that all present-day
languages derive from a single proto-langue, through a process of increasing
diversification. Since historical linguistics does not allow for the calculation
of a rate of language diversification over an extremely long period, nor does
it provide a starting point for this process, Ruhlen uses a package of archaeological,
paleoanthropological, and genetic “evidence” to estimate a date
for the origin of language diversification. He proposes that this process may
have started 40,000–50,000 years ago, on the basis of (1) the date for the beginning
of the Upper Paleolithic in Europe, with its purported “explosion” of
symbolic activities, (2) the arrival of Anatomically Modern Humans (AMH)
in this region, (3) models suggesting a dramatic change in human cognition
all over the world at this time (Klein, 1999; Mellars, 1996a), and (4) current
hypotheses on the timing of the first colonization of Australia and New
Guinea. This model also assumes that only AMHs could speak a modern
language or, if this was not the case, that languages spoken, for example, by
Neandertals in Europe and the Near East did not contribute to languages
spoken by contemporary and more recent AMH populations.
The strongest challenges to Ruhlen’s scenario (see also Greenberg,
2000) come from historical linguists who disagree with his heretical methodology,
which abandons the very methodological precision that has put IndoEuropean
linguistics on a scientific footing, distinguishing it from the work
of erudite amateurs. However, few of these critics seem to be aware that the
package of knowledge, external to their discipline, on which Ruhlen’s scenario
is based, might be better described as a mere assemblage of working
hypotheses constantly challenged by contradictory counterparts and new
relevant finds.
A number of recent discoveries challenge models that equate the symbolic
revolution with the arrival of AMH in Europe some 37,000 years ago
(Bar-Yosef, 1998; Mellars, 1996a, 1998; Stringer and Gamble, 1993). Evidence
suggests that late Neandertals produced and wore a repertoire of personal
ornaments (Fig. 1), interpreted as proof of symbolic thinking (d’Errico
et al., 1998c; Granger and Lev`eque, 1997). An increasing number of objects
found in Lower and Middle Paleolithic sites from the Near East, Europe,
and in Middle Stone Age sites from Africa, together with new dating of
Neandertal burials, supports the hypothesis of an origin of symbolism earlier
than that of the Middle–Upper Paleolithic transition in Europe (cf. discussion
in d’Errico et al., 2001; d’Errico and Nowell, 2000; Henshilwood et al.,
2001a,b, 2002; McBrearty and Brooks, 2000). Finally, the Near East archaeological
record reveals striking behavioral similarities between Neandertals
and AMHs (Bar-Yosef, 1992; Shea, 2001), making it presumptuous to assume
dramatic differences in their cognitive abilities.
Recent excavations at the sites of Twin Rivers in Zambia (Barham, 1998,
2000, 2002) and Kapthurin in Kenya (McBrearty, 2001) have yielded convincing
proof of the symbolic use of pigments during the Acheulean–Middle
Stone Age transition (ca. 200,000 years ago). These behaviors could be associated
with archaic Homo sapiens (sensu lato). Fieldwork at Twin Rivers
led to the discovery in 1999 of 176 fragments of pigment in layers dated to
between 260,000 and 400,000 years. Five different pigment colors with traces
of use are recorded. Geological surveys indicate that prehistoric people must
have collected these pigments several kilometers away from the settlement
site. Layers dated to 200,000 years also yielded 132 pigment samples. The
variety of colors denotes a more than functional use of these minerals. If pigment
use is an archaeological indication of symbolic behavior, and indirectly
of language, the origin of these abilities, traditionally attributed to AMH,
has to be considered more ancient than commonly accepted.
At Blombos Cave (Western Cape, South Africa), careful examination
of 8000 ocher pieces and an elaborate bone industry (associated with a Still
Bay lithic assemblage ca. 75,000 years old) revealed ocher pieces and bone
fragments engraved (Fig. 2) with abstract patterns (d’Errico et al., 2001;
Henshilwood et al., 2001a,b, 2002; Henshilwood and Sealy, 1997). The engraved
ochers associated with the remains of Homo sapiens constitute, at
present, the most ancient irrefutable evidence for symbolic behavior.
Both functional and natural interpretations have been proposed for a
number of isolated bone finds from Lower and Middle Paleolithic sites in
Europe and the Near East (d’Errico and Villa, 1997). However, the shaping,
marking, and use of bone was a regular activity at Blombos Cave.
The techniques employed in bone modification at this site are complex
(d’Errico et al., 2001; Henshilwood et al., 2001b) and must have been acquired
through linguistic communication rather than by observation or mimicry.
The multiple-stroke technique used to engrave a bone fragment at Blombos
Cave (d’Errico et al., 2001) is evidence of coherent behavior and technical
knowledge shared and transmitted within a community. No functional
interpretation of these lines can be reasonably implied, as has been suggested
for utilized ocher from Middle Stone Age (MSA) sites. The engraved ocher
fragments also show traces of scraping and grinding similar to those
recorded on the 8000 ocher fragments excavated from the same levels at
Blombos Cave. The presence of a symbolic engraving on utilized pigment
suggests that a solely functional use of pigments by MSA peoples is
unlikely.
Linguists and scholars interested in the evolution of human cognition
need to be aware of these and other discoveries, and archaeologists need to
develop methods of analysis to explore the overall significance of archaeological
material, thus paving the way for a solid database on which any theoretical
superstructure might be built. The best transdisciplinary theories are
those where the contribution of each involved discipline is apparent, each of
them has independent means to test hypotheses, and untested assumptions
of one are not used as pillars for another.

In recent years, there has been a tendency to correlate the origin of
modern culture and language with that of Anatomically Modern Humans.
However, this correlation should be considered, as far as archaeology is
concerned, as no more than a model that needs to be tested against empirical
data.
To avoid the shortcomings inherent in directly correlating AMH with
modern culture and language, we can utilize the behavioral corollary of
language abilities and, in particular, its expression in material culture, to
create a properly structured model on which to base their origin. It is widely
accepted that a direct link exists between the highly symbolic nature of modern
language (i.e. its capacity to refer to past, present and future-actual or
imaginary-events) and the creation, maintenance, and transmission of the
material expression of symbols within a given human culture. The only direct
evidence for the first use of symbolic language amongst humans is the
recognition in the archaeological record of the material products of symbolic
thinking. However, the mere presence of an artifact does not indicate how it
was used nor can its function be implied by supposition or simple interpretation.
Useful additional evidence for language capacity is provided by the
human fossil record (e.g. Arensburg et al., 1990).
Therefore, we need to establish how, when, and where symbolic cultures
first developed, whether they have single or multiple origins, and whether
they can be assigned to specific human groups. Our joint effort involves
examination of all categories of potentially symbolic material culture produced
by Neandertals and early AMH (personal ornaments, decorated tools,
utilized pigments, engraved bones and stones, burials, grave goods, systems
of notation, musical instruments, complex bone technologies) from Europe,
Africa, and the Near East. Our aim is also to tentatively trace major steps
in the diversification of languages in Europe during the Upper Paleolithic
through the analysis of symbolic objects functionally equivalent to language.
In this paper, we present a synthesis of the research in progress, discuss its
implications for the question of the origin of behavioral modernity and language,
and sketch a provisional model for the emergence of these abilities. To
achieve this goal we will focus on the evolutionary significance of lithic and
bone technology, origin of symbolism, Neandertal behavior, early burials,
paleontological evidence for language, origin of conscious symbolic storage,
origin of musical tradition, and the archaeological evidence for the diversi-
fication of language during the Upper Paleolithic.
It has been suggested that the study of ancient technologies and, in particular,
lithic artifacts provides a sound basis for the evaluation of hominid
cognitive abilities (e.g. Bo¨eda, 1991, 1997; Karlin and Julien, 1994; Pelegrin,
1990; Perl`es, 1992; Roche et al. 1999; Schlanger, 1994, 1996; Wynn, 1979, 1985,
1991). However, while major trends of artifact evolution have been proposed
(e.g. Isaac, 1986; Pigeot, 1991; Toth and Schick, 1993; Wynn, 1993, but see
McPherron, 2000), the implications of these changes for the evolution of human
cognition are far from clear. Binford (1979, 1989) characterized early
human technology as poorly organized and “tending toward the expedient
manufacture, use, and abandonment of instrumental items in the immediate
context of use” (Binford, 1977, p. 34). This hypothesis, together with an
interpretation of faunal remains, concludes that early humans had limited
predatory abilities (Binford, 1981). It also argues that Neandertal and earlier
societies were much less complex than early modern ones (Binford, 1981,
1989; White, 1982) and that there was a difference, even a clear inferiority,
in the cognitive abilities of Neandertals, when compared to early AMH
(Binford, 1989; Noble and Davidson, 1996; Stringer and Gamble, 1993). New
research makes it clear that behaviors considered by Binford as peculiar to
AMH were progressively acquired by Neandertals. This is the case for the
transport, resharpening and standardization of stone tools (Callow, 1986,
pp. 374–375; Conard and Adler, 1997; Geneste, 1985, 1989, 1990; Roebroeks
et al., 1988; Soressi 2002; Soressi and Hays, 2003), hunting strategies
(Armand et al., 2001; Brugal, 1999; Chase, 1987, 1989; Farizy and David,
1992; Gaudzinski and Roebroeks, 2000), and the organization of habitation
sites (Farizy, 1990; Leroi-Gourhan, 1982).
Some scholars have used Piaget’s theory (1947, 1976), according to
which the steps in mental development of children correspond to the cognitive
frontiers crossed by humanity during its evolution, to try and estimate
ancient hominid cognitive capacities (Longuet-Higgins, 1996; Wynn, 1985).
However, this approach has produced contradictory results. Russell (1996)
states, for example, that hominids during the Middle–Upper Paleolithic transition
were capable of symbolic thought. Other scholars (Gibson, 1985;
Gibson and Mellars, 1996, pp. 5–6; Gowlett, 1984; Wynn, 1979) believe
that Acheulean populations already possessed these capacities a few hundred
thousand years earlier. This is but one example of how archaeologists
reach opposing conclusions based on the same facts. A further case in
point is Mithen’s interpretation of the behavioral differences between the
Middle and Upper Paleolithic (Mithen, 1994, 1996a,b), as a consequence
of a shift from a Neandertal-specific intelligence to Modern Human generalized
intelligence—the latter being the only hominids able to integrate
social and natural history, technical knowledge, and cognitive thought processes.
Others see the same empirical evidence as the expression of uneven
cultural development with no evolutionary implications (d’Errico, in pressa,-b;
Hayden, 1993; Simek, 1992). The main reason for such a striking lack
of consensus is the absence of a sound analogy that establishes a firm link
between a given form of stone tool technology and a degree of intelligence,
whatever that may be (cf. Ingold, 1993, p. 344; Renfrew, 1996; Wynn, 1991).
When stone tools produced by modern ethnographic societies or by past
societies that we know were behaviorally modern, such as those of the Upper
Paleolithic, are used as an analogy to characterize the more recent step
of this evolutionary process, a number of features appear as valuable criteria
for detecting the acquisition of modern cognitive abilities and language.
Long distance exchange of raw materials and the production of stylistically
distinct tool categories certainly represent robust evidence of symbolic cultures
and linguistically transmitted traditions (Deacon, 1993; Deacon and
Deacon, 1999; Sackett, 1982; Wynn, 1998). Fully symbolic societies using
very basic lithic technologies, however, also exist (Mulvaney and Kamminga,
1999), and this seems to demonstrate that, while the occurrence of stylized
stone tools suggests modern cognition, their absence cannot be assumed to
indicate “archaic” adaptations.

Complex societies are generally characterized by varied and complex
technical systems, involving production of tools made from different raw
materials and the use of these tools for different technical activities. A
panoply of tools and techniques implies diversified strategies for raw material
acquisition, more complex cultural transmission, the possible emergence of
craft specialization, and increased complexity of social roles. The evolution of
toolmaking from simple to composite, and the further development of using
tools to make tools, might even be seen as the archaeological reflection
of the transition from a proto-language to a language with a more complex
structure. It is probably for these reasons that use of composite tools, hafting,
and, in particular, the production of bone and ivory tools, with techniques
specifically conceived for these materials, such as scraping, grinding, grooving,
and polishing, are generally considered by archaeologists to be important
features characterizing modern human behavior (Ambrose, 2001; Klein,
2000; McBrearty and Brooks, 2000; Mellars, 1973).
What do we know of the emergence of these behaviors? Complex bone
technologies have long been seen as an invention of AMH during their
spread across Europe, ca. 35 thousand years ago (Bar-Yosef, 1992, 1998;
Klein, 1999; Mellars, 1973). However, the existence of used or shaped bone
and ivory points functioning as awls or with wooden hafts has also been
suggested for a number of Lower and Middle Paleolithic sites from Europe
(Bordes, 1984; Gaudzinski, 1999; Howell and Freeman, 1983). Shaped bone
tools were also reported from a number of late Neandertal sites in France and
Italy, yielding Chˆatelperronian and Uluzzian stone tools, but their presence
in those layers was interpreted by many as resulting from a reworking of
sediments, or as evidence for an acculturation of the last Neandertals by the
Modern colonizers. Recent research on this topic, mostly conducted in the
framework of our multidisciplinary project, presents a different picture.

Most of the objects from Lower and Middle Paleolithic sites have been
published without a validating microscopic analysis of the bone surface to
show possible traces of manufacture and use. This kind of physical examination
is necessary because we know that natural processes can produce
pseudobone tools similar to those attributed to humans. In a number of recent
papers (Backwell and d’Errico, 2001; d’Errico et al., 2002; Villa and
d’Errico, 2001), an integrated method has been developed on the basis
of taphonomic observations, actualistic data, replicative experiments, and
microscopic analysis to assess putative shaped or used bone tools from
Lower and Middle Paleolithic sites. The oldest evidence for modification
and use of bone points comes from the sites of Swartkrans, Sterkfontein, and
Drimolen in South Africa (Brain and Shipman, 1993; Keyser et al., 2000).
Using the purported bone tools from Swartkrans and Sterkfontein (dated to
ca. 1.8–1 million years), we reanalyzed the evidence for these being tools, and
reappraised their probable function. Previous work, based on microscopic
analysis of a number of specimens, led to the interpretation of these bones
as tools used for digging up tubers and working skins. However, this was not
supported by a comparison of the tool morphology and wear pattern with
those produced by natural processes known to mimic anthropogenic modi-
fications. Brain and Shipman (1993) did not consider alternative functional
interpretations, nor did they test those experimentally using appropriate analytical
methods. Other potentially relevant data that we have taken into
account (species, type of bone used, fracture patterns, degree of weathering,
bone flake morphometry, spatial distribution) were not collected or
discussed by Brain and Shipman in the context of the site’s taphonomy.
Our analysis of the wear patterns on the purported bone tools, pseudobone
tools resulting from known taphonomic processes, and experimentally
used bone tools confirm the anthropogenic origin of the modifications.
Additionally, our analysis suggests that these tools were probably used to
dig into termite mounds, rather than to dig for tubers.
We used dental impression material to make replicas of all the
Swartkrans and Sterkfontein putative tools, and optical and scanning electron
microscopy to identify the features that they had in common. Each
specimen was found to have a rounded tip, showing individual longitudinal
striations running parallel to the main axis of the bone. The orientation and
dimension of the striations were recorded on a random sample of 18 fossils,
using image analysis software. We then examined the faunal collection
from Swartkrans for specimens with a similar wear pattern. We found 16
new pieces with equivalent wear, giving a total of 84 specimens. The wear
pattern appeared to be a feature peculiar to the bone tool collection, and
did not represent an extreme form of a process affecting the entire assemblage.
Cave sedimentation was thus eliminated as a possible causal agent.
We examined 35 reference collections of modern and fossil bones from open
air and cave contexts (13,301 specimens) modified by 10 nonhuman agents
(animal and geological). Of the pieces examined, 24 appeared similar to the
archaeological specimens. We made resin replicas of these pseudotools and
examined them as above. None had the distinctive wear pattern observed
on the Swartkrans and Sterkfontein specimens. We then compared the wear
pattern on these bones with that of experimentally created modern bone
tools. Using antelope limb bone shaft fragments and horn cores, we dug for
tubers in a range of soil types, scraped and pierced animal hides, and dug
out termites from their mounds.
The wear patterns on the termite tools proved to be virtually indistinguishable
from those on the archaeological specimens. This leads us
to conclude that the latter were not only real tools, but that they were
predominantly used to dig termites out of the numerous termite mounds
found in the Swartkrans/Sterkfontein area. Alternative explanations are unlikely
for two reasons. They would require the identification of a subsistence
activity based on extensive digging carried out exclusively in a fine-grained,
stoneless soil matrix such as that of termite mounds, a feature unlikely to
occur in the deposits of the Sterkfontein Valley or inside the Swartkrans
caves. Second, while limb bone shaft fragments are suitable for breaking
the hard crusts of termite mounds, they appear inefficient for other digging
activities when compared with the long, stout digging sticks used by modern
hunter–gatherers to extract buried tubers, larvae, and small game.
Termites are a valuable source of protein and fat in the diets of primates
and human foragers. Chimpanzees are known to both “fish” for termites as
well as perforate and dig termite mounds in a variety of ways. By digging
termites out of their nests, hominids would have made available a rich food
source that was otherwise only accessible during the period when insects
voluntarily leave their nests for breeding.
The Swartkrans and Sterkfontein bone tools are not formally shaped,
as are those from later periods (e.g. Blombos Cave and see below). However,
analysis of the breakage patterns indicates that the early hominid users
selected heavily weathered bone fragments of a particular size range (13–
19 cm) and shape (long, straight bone flakes, and horn cores). Metric analysis
of the Swartkrans faunal collection also suggests that the bone tools are a
discrete population within the assemblage, in that the lengths of the few
complete worn bones fall outside the range of the lengths of the unworn
long bone fragments from the site, and even the broken tools are generally
longer. A similar result is obtained when the widths of the tools are compared
with those of the other fragments, or the thickness of the compact bones in
the two populations, suggesting that longer, wider, and more robust bone
fragments were selected.
Who used these tools? The predominant numbers of robust australopithecines
at Swartkrans and Drimolen (associated with 23 undescribed bone
tools), and the fact that no stone tools have been found at Drimolen, might
suggest that the bone tool culture belonged to Paranthropus (Australopithecus)
robustus. It is still a matter of debate, however, whether this hominid
was a stone toolmaker. The absence of these tools in southern African sites
younger than 1 million years suggests that this technique was not passed on
to more recent Homo populations. The discovery of future sites with bone
tools associated with a single hominid type will certainly help clarify this
issue. Another open question is why these types of tools exist only in southern
Africa. Possible bone tools have been identified at Olduvai (Shipman,
1989); they mostly consist of heavy broken shaft fragments and epiphyses
from very large mammals with evidence of large flake removals. Are these
bone tools genuine and, if so, is this difference indicative of cultural traditions
distinct from those of southern Africa? This is the question that Backwell
and d’Errico are now trying to answer through the ongoing reanalysis of the
Olduvai putative tools. What is the significance of these bone tools for the
evolution of cognition and language origin? Studies on chimpanzees have
demonstrated (Whiten et al., 1999) that each group is characterized by different
and rather complex cultural traditions that are subject to ecological
influences. The transmission of these traditions, however, does not seem to
require language competence. Relatively complex activities requiring a high
degree of neuromotor control, such as nut-cracking, can be passed to offspring
by imitation and gesture. In conclusion, our study shows that the use
of bone as a raw material need not, in itself, imply modern cognitive abilities
and should not be considered a hallmark of behavioral modernity.

